A, A1, A2 HORIZON = (sol) See SOIL PROFILE.
A.H.D. = (sur) See DATUM.
A.P.I. = (mis) Syn. AERIAL PHOTOGRAPH INTERPRETATION.
ABANDONED MINE = (DERELICT MINE) (mm) A mine which has been inactive for some considerable time and for which no title is current or where the lease has been cancelled.
ABNEY LEVEL = (sur) See LEVEL.
ABRASION DETACHMENT = (gen) See DETACHMENT.
ABSORPTION AREA = (gen) Syn. WATER DISPOSAL AREA.
ABSORPTION BANK = (str) See BANK.
ACCELERATED EROSION = (gen) See EROSION.
ACCEPTABLE OUTLET = (str) Syn. STABLE OUTLET.
ACCRETION = (csd) Gradual addition of sand to a beach or lake shoreline during periods of light on-shore wind and/or lowered sea level.
ACID SOIL = (sol) A soil giving an acid reaction throughout most or all of the soil profite (precisely. helow a pH of 7.0; practically, below a pH of 6.5). Generally speaking, acid soils become a problem when the pH drops below 5.5. At this level, and particularly below 5.0, the following specific problems may occur - aluminium toxicity, manganese toxicity, calcium deficiency and/or molybdenum deficiency. Such problems adversely affect plant growth and root nodulation, which may result in a decline in plant cover and increase in erosion hazard. The term is frequently used to describe soils with acidity problems as above.Correction of the acidity is normally carried out by the application of appropriate amounts ot lime to bring the soil pH to a level of 6.0 - 6.5.See also pH.
ACIDITY= (sol) The chemical activity of hydrogen ions in soil expressed in terms ol pH. See also ACID SOIL, pH,
ACTIVE RECREATION= (urb)A level of land development which provides for ovals, camp sites or other activities requiring extensive clearing or levelling for facilities, Cf. PASSIVE RECREATION.See also RECREATIONAL CAPABILITY CLASSIFICATION.
ADSORPTION= (sol) The interaction of ions with the surfaces of soil materials, particularly with organic matter and inorganic colloidal substances comprising part of the clay fraction. In this way nutrients in solution, made up of ions, become attracted to sites on soil particles with an opposite charge.
AEOLIAN= (If m) A term applied to deposits of soil materials transported and/or arranged by wind.
AERIAL PHOTOGRAPH= (rrns)Any photograph taken of the surface of the earth from fixed wing aircraft, helicopters, balloons or spacecraft. There are two categories of aerial photography: Vertical . where an attempt is made to keep the optical axis of the camera perpendicular to the earth's surface. If the axis is exactly vertical, the photo is called a truly vertical photo and therefore contains zero TILT. However, in practice it is impossible to keep the camera axis vertical and small tilts of less than 3 degrees are tolerated, The resultant photos are referred to as near vertical and may be regarded as equivalent to truly vertical for most photo interpretation purposes.Oblique where the optical axis is deliberately tilted away from the vertical. If it is tilted sufficiently to include the horizon, the photo is called a high oblique and it the horizon does not appear, it is called a low oblique. Oblique aerial photographs cover more ground area than vertical aerial photographs exposed at the same altitude.
AERIAL PHOTOGRAPH INTERPRETATION= (API) (rms) A technique of obtaining information from aerial photographs, principally applied to the techniques involving the stereoscopic viewing of the photographs. This method enables the evaluation of terrain in three dimensions. lt is basically a deductive process that requires conscious or subconscious consideration of the elements of the image. The quality, reliability and efficiency of any interpretation are dependent on the personal experience and expertise of the interpreter. The acquisition ol such knowledge, either by field examination to establish ground truth, or by the study of available maps and reports, should, therefore be considered an essential part of any photo-interpretation job.
AERIAL PHOTOGRAPH INTERPRETATION= (Continued) API involves three basic steps:1.examine the photographs o get a three-dimensional perception.2.idenlify ground conditions by observing certain elements appearing in lhe pholographs: and 3.analysing specific problems by the association of ground conditions with one's background experience.No other technique can provide a three-dimensional overview of the terrain from which the inter-relations of topography, drainage, surface cover, geologic materials, and human activities on the landscape can be viewed and evaluated. (Reference: Rib, F-IT, and Liang, T. Recognition and Identification. In Landslides : Analysis and Control, Transportation Research Board, National Academy of Sciences, Washington D.C., U.S.A., Special Report 176, Chapter 3. 1978).
AFFORESTATION= (for) The establishment of a forest on land that has not previously, or not recently, been timbered. Cf. REAF FOR E STATION.
AGGRADATION= (gen) The process of building up of surfaces, such as streambeds or floodplains, by the deposition of sediment and/or colluvium,
AGGREGATE= (gen)A cluster of particles, held together by inter-particle forces or bonds. The term is also used to mean road gravel. See atso SOIL AGGREGATE.
AGROFORESTRY= (agr for) The integration of commercial tree growing into the operation of a farming enterprise. t involves the commercial utifisafion of native frees as welt as the planting and management of quicker-growing frees through afforestation, The aim is to ensure a long term viable enterprise based on timber and limber products, as part of the overall farm operation,
AGRONOMY= (agi-)The study of land management and associated practices for the establishment, growth and use of crops and pastures Involves an understanding of soils, land. climate, plant characteristics and animal husbandry in relation to crop and pasture production,
AIR SEEDER= (eng) See DRILL.
ALCOVE= (If m) A moderately inclined to very steep open depression with concave cross-section, such as the recess created in a hi//slope as the result of a slump,
ALKALINE SOIL= (sol) A soil giving an alkaline reaction throughout most or all o! the soil profile (precisely, above a pH of 7.0; practically, above a pH of 8.0). Many alkaline soils have a high pH indicated by the presence of calcium carbonale, and are suitable tor agriculture. However, others are problem soils because of salinity and/or sodicity. Soils with a pH above 9.5 are generally unsuitable for agriculture. See also SODIC SOIL, SALINE SOIL, pH.
ALKALINITY= (sol) The chemical condition of soil with a pH greater than 7.0. Often associated with saline soils and sodic soils. See also pH.
ALLUVIAL= (Ifni, sol) Describes material deposited by, or in transit in, flowing water. See also ALLUVIUM.
ALLUVIAL FAN= (Um) An accretion of sediments in a flowline characterised by radial slope lines inclined away from a point, giving it a typical fan' shape Such deposits may build up to eventually block and divert flows.
ALLUVIAL PLAIN= (If m) A large flat area of alluvium. Although it includes floodplains, the preferred use of the term is to describe former floodplains where there is no recent accumulation of sediment,
ALLUVIAL SOIL= (sol) A soil developed from recently deposited alluvium, normally characterised by little or no modification of the deposited material by soil-forming processes, 'particularly with respect to soil horizon development.
ALLUVIUM= (tim, sol) An extensive stream-laid deposit of unconsolidated material, including gravel, sand, silt and clay. Typically it forms lloodplains that develop alluvial soils,
ALPINE= (gen) Describes the area above the timber line in mountainous terrain which is determined by the occurrence of low temperatures. In Australia, the dominant vegetation consists of a snowgrass-herb community.
AMELIORANT= (sol) Syn. SOIL AMELIORANT.
ANAEROBIC= (sol) Describes soil conditions in which free oxygen is deficient and chemically, reducing processes prevail. Such conditions are usually found in waterlogged or poorly drained soils in which water has replaced soil air. Ant. AEROBIC.
ANGLE OF REPOSE= (eng) The stable angle between the horizontal and the maximum slope that loose material assumes through the influence of gravity.
ANIONIC BITUMEN EMULSION= (gen) See BITUMEN EMULSION.
ANNUAL CROPPING= (agr) A cropping system where one crop per year is grown on the same piece of land,
ANNUAL EXCEEDANCE PROBABILITY= (hyd) The chance that a particular storm or flood event will be equalled or exceeded in any year, expressed as a percentage. lt is the reciprocal of return period. For example, a 20 year return period is equivalent to a 5 per cent annual exceedance probability.
ANNUAL PASTURE= (agr) See PASTURE.
ANNUAL PLANT= (agr) A plant which completes its life cycle and dies within one year or less. The lite cycle includes production of roots, stems, leaves, flowers and finally seed for further regeneration. Cf. BIENNIAL PLANT, PERENNIAL PLANT.
ANTECEDENT MOISTURE CONTENT= (sol) The moisture content of a soil prior to a rainfall event. It has an important influence on the liketihood of runoff occurring as a result of subsequent rainfall, because antecedent moisture restricts the amount of infiltration which can take place.
ANTI-SEEP COLLAR= (eng) Syn. COLLAR,
ANTI-VORTEX DEVICE (eng)=A device, usually a vertical or horizontal plate, placed at the entrance of a pipe to prevent the formation of a vortex (whirlpool effect) in the water at the pipe entrance.
APEDAL= (soI) Describes a soil in which none of the soil material occurs in the form of peds in the moist state. Such a soil is without apparent structure and is typically massive or single grained. When disturbed it separates into primary particles or fragments which may be crushed to primary particles. Ant. PEDAL.
APRON= (eng) A layer of concrete, stone, timber, or other relatively permanent material placed at the entrance or outlet of a hydraulic structure, such as a culvert or chute, in the channel bed, to protect the structure against erosion.
AOUIFER= (sol) A porous soil or geological formation, often lying between impermeable sub-surface slrata, which holds water and through which water can percolate slowly over long distances and which yields ground water to springs and wells. Aquifers may, however, be unconfined and the water level subject to seasonal inflow. An AQUITAnO is also a groundwaterbearing formation but is insufficiently permeable to transmit and yield water in usable quantities.
AQUITARD= (gen) See AQUIFER.
ARABLE= (agr) Describes land suitable for the economic production of crops, usually involving regular cultivation.
ARID= (ram) Refers to climates or regions which lack sufficient raintau for crop production or extensive sown pastures. Usually defined as a climate with annual average rainlall less than 250 mm (10 inches). See also SEMI-ARID.
ARMOURING= (gen) The process of development of a layer of coarse particles on the surface of a soil which is capable of protecting the soil below from wind or flowing water.
ARMOURING LAYER= (gen) A layer of particles, some of which may be in the process of being moved by erosive forces, but which are deep enough to prevent access of Ihe moving wind or water Io the soil below. lt protects the underlying soil until il is broken by stock trampling or cultivation or until a stronger erosion event removes il.
ASPECT= (Ifm)The direction that a slope faces, measured at right angles lo the contour.
ASSAY= (mm) The determination of the total amount of one or more constituents of a rock or ore.
ASSOCIATION= (ram, alp) A stable plant community of definite composition, presenting a uniform appearance and growing in more or less uniform habitat conditions.
ASSOCIATION= (rms) The identificalion of an image on an aerial photograph by inference; that is, certain features can be inferred as occurring by the presence of other readily identifiable leatures. For example, in some areas soil types can be determined from vegetation types, the latter being the more readily identifiable features from the aerial photographs.
ASSOCIATION= (sol, lev) Syn. SOIL ASSOCIATION.
ATTERBERG LIMITS= (sol)The soil waler conlents al the solid/plastic and plastici liquid boundaries. Atterberg limits are based on the concept that a fine-grained soil can exist in any of three slates depending on ils water conlenl. Thus, on the addition of waler, a soil may proceed from the solid state through to the plastic and finally liquid states. The water contents at the boundaries between adjacenl slates are termed the plastic limit and the liquid limit, Water content is expressed as a percentage of the oven dry weight of soil.These limits are used to categorise(For categorise see:ATTERBERG LIMITS:PLASTIC LIMIT,ATTERBERG LIMITS:LIOUID LIMIT,ATTERBERG LIMITS:PLASTICITY INDEX) soil materials in terms of their likely engineering behaviour at different moisture contents such as in building or road foundations, Prior to earthwork construction, their determination assists the specification of required compaction levels, batter slopes and optimum moisture levels for construction. See also UNIFIED SOIL CLASSICATION SYSTEM, PLASTIC, SOIL PLASTICITY, LINEAR SHRINKAGE.
ATTERBERG LIMITS:PLASTIC LIMIT= (PL) The plaslic limit of a soil is the water content at which the soil passes from the solid to the plastic state. It is arbitrarily defined as the lowest water content at which the soil can be rolled into threads 3 mm in diameter without the threads breaking into pieces. (Australian Standard AS 1289.02.1 - 1977)
ATTERBERG LIMITS:LIOUID LIMIT= (LL) The liquid limit of a soil is the water content at which the soil passes from the ptastic to the liquid state. lt is arbitrarily defined as the water content at which two halves of a soil cake will flow together for a distance of 12 mm along the bottom of the groove separating the two halves, when dropped 25 times trom a distance of 10 mm at the rate of 2 drops/second, using standard apparatus. (AS 1289.01.1 - 1977)
ATTERBERG LIMITS:PLASTICITY INDEX= (Pl) The plasticity index of a soil is the numerical difference between the plastic limit and the liquid limit. (AS 1289.03.1 - 1977).
AUSTRALIAN HEIGHT DATUM= (sur) See DATUM.
AUTECOLOGY= (gen) The study of relationships between a single species and its environment. Cf. SYNECOLOGY.
AUTOMATIC LEVEL= (sur) See LEVEL.
AVAILABLE NUTRIENT= (sol) The portion of any element or compound in the soil that can be taken up and assimilated by plants to enhance their growth and development. See also PLANT NUTRIENT.
AVAILABLE SOIL WATER= (sol) That part of the water in the soil that can be absorbed by plant roots. The amount of water held between the moisture content prevailing at any point in time and the moisture content at which plant growth ceases.Plants have difficulty extracting moisture when the available soil water approaches wilting point. Where soil moisture can be controlled, the aim is to maintain it at a level where it can be readily extracted by plants, that is to prevent moisture depletion below about 50 per cent of the available range. See also FIELD CAPACITY.
AVAILABLE WATER-HOLDING CAPACITY= (sol)The amount of water in the soil, generally available to plants, that can be held between field capacity and the moisture content at which plant growth ceases. Sometimes also known as the PLANT-AVAILABLE WATER CAPACITY.
AVALANCHE= (gen) A form of mass movement that results in a characteristic long and narrow track down the steep slopes on which it typically occurs. Downhill motion is extremely rapid and it may occur under a variety of moisture conditions.
AVALANCHING= (ram, cad) The process of self-perpetuation that increases the intensityand severity of wind erosion down-wind. lt may be initiated by sa/tation whence the particles, as they hit the ground, dislodge more particles resulting in a cumulative effect down-wind.

B, B1, B2,HORIZON= (sol) See SOIL PROFILE.
BACK-PUSH BANK= (Str) See BANK.
BACKPLAIN = (lfm) A large flat area comprising the part of a tloodp fain away from the watercourse beyond the /evee. It is often characterised by a high water table, fine sediments, and the presence of swamps or lakes.
BACKSIGHT= (sur) The first sight taken after setting up a level. A back sight is taken to a bench mark at the start of levelling and then to change points at each subsequent instrument set up. See also FORESIGHT,INTERMEDIATE SIGHT.
BACKWATER= (agi) A strep cropping term for surface water backed up by vegetated strips, typically on country of less than one per cent slope. Runoff is retarded as it moves through the vegetated strips with the result that velocity is also reduced on the cultivated strips above, provided that the strips are not too wide. See also STRIP WIDTH.
BAND SEEDING= (agr) Drilling seed and fertiliser in the one operation in separate but adjacent bands,
BANK= (tfm)Syn. STREAMBANK
BANK= (Str) A constructed earth embankment, incorporating a channel on the upslope side, typically traversing a slope to control and/or prevent the erosion of that slope. This is achieved by intercepting, diverting or storing runoff instead of permitting it to flow uninterrupted down the stope. The purpose of each bank is to increase the time of concent ration of runoff and to control its volume and velocity so that serious erosion will not occur.Where a series of banks is constructed it is possible, particularly in an arable situation and depending on the bank design criteria used, that some interbank erosion will occur. Complementary land management practices such as contour farming and conservation ti/fa ge carried out between the banks should then aim to prevent such erosion. Banks should be maintained to conform with their designed purpose.Apart from banks built for the above purposes there are also a number of banks designed for other more specific purposes such as waterspreading.Two basic construction methods are used. A CONVENTIONAL BANK is constructed by moving the soil downslope so that the excavation or channel is immediately above the bank. A BACK-PUSH BANK is constructed by moving the soil upslope so that the excavation is immediately below the bank. These are constructed where it is necessary to retain undisturbed vegetation on the upslope side, such as in critical disposal situations on highly erodible soils.
LEVEL BANK = (CONTOUR BANK) A bank that is constructed along the true contour,its channet being level, and which discharges at either or both ends depending on design requirements. Typically used on grazing land.
ABSORPTION BANK= (PONDAGE BANK) A level bank with a turn-up at each end designed to pond water to a pre-determined depth. Not normally used on impermeable soils or on arable land because of the undesirable effects of ponded water in the cropping situation. When designed to intercept inter/low the term INTERCEPTOR BANK may be used.
GRADED BANK= (GRADE BANK)A bank buitt with a design fall along the channel,to allow water to flow in a specified direction.Primarily used on arable land, but atso on grazing land to some extent. Design grades normally range from 0.1 to 0.5 per cent depending on soil type and design requirements. Some very long banks would be progressively increased in capacity, in order to handle the large flows which develop towards the outlet end.
DIVERSION BANK= A bank specifically designed to divert water, normatly to protect a cultivated area, a gully, eroded area, work or facility below, or to carry runoff to or from a dam or waterway away from the natural drainage line. Such banks are typically graded.
GAP SPREADER BANK = A level bank constructed to allow waler to be spread by a series of gaps in the bank. Excavation from below creates a level channel into which water flows through the gaps, and from which it spreads evenly over land downslope. Such banks are normally used in marginal arable areas, where large amounts of runoff are to be controlled and soils are relatively impermeable.
GAP ABSORPTION SPREADER BANK = A series of related absorption banks constructed on the same contour which allow water to be spread via the gaps between them. Excavation
DIVERSION SPREADER BANK = A bank that collects water from high runoffproducing areas and diverts and spreads out the flow to increase the production from a limited area downslope. Such banks normally consist of a diversion bank and a gap spreader bank joined by a continuous channel. They are particularly suitable for use in marginal arable areas.
CHECK BANK = A short level bank constructed lo stow and spread flows from other structures.
TRAINER BANK= A hank constructed to prevent flows from spreading or to direct runoff away Irom an - undesirable location and/or towards a stable outlet. Such a bank is designed so that runoff flows on natural vegetation and will only be guided or contained by it. The grade may be relatively steep as the bank may have to run partty across or directly up and down the slope.
WATERWAY BANK = A bank constructed at the side(s) of a waterway to retain runoff within the designed width. Such banks normally run directly up and down the slope.
PROTECTIVE BANK = A temporary bank constructed to prevent runoff flowing onto an unstable area. Once the area has been stabilised, typically by the establishment of an adequate vegetative cover, the bank may be removed, Such a bank is particularly uselul at the inlet of a constructed earth channel or waterway to prevent runoff entering until vegetation is established, In such cases the runoff must be temporarily diverted to a stable outlet at another location.Banks can be further characterised by their crosssectional shape which will depend upon land use, topography, soils and other design criteria:
BROAD-BASED BANK (ROLLOVER BANK) = A low profile bank with smoothed cross section and gentle batters which are weil compacted. The shape enables travel across them and tillage along their length with agricultural machinery. Such banks should be constructed so that the cross sections are not curved, to facilitate even sowing depths along each face. They are particutarly suited to arable lands of slope 2-6 per cent and to situations where easy access is required. Slopes from 6 to 10 per cent may necessitate shorter batter lengths which may not be suitable for the wider types of agricultural machinery.Broad-based banks are also well suited to situations where expansive soils occur,
RIDGE TYPE BANK (PEAK TYPE BANK) = A narrowbaed bank having a more or less triangular cross section. Particularly suited to the handling of large volumes of runoff and used frequently on slopes in excess of 10 per cent.In the design of banking systems there may be one or more KEY BANKS. A key bank is one which has a specific localion to achieve a special result. For example it may be a bank to collect discharge (rom a culvert at a property boundary and divert it to a waterway. To do this effectively it must collect that discharge as close as possible to the boundary and hence variation in its location will be limited. This bank becomes a key bank in the system and other banks should be spaced up or down slope from it. The location of such banks should be established before planning others.
BANK CAPACITY= (Str) The calculated or actual volume or discharge rate of a soil conservation bank. For a graded bank the important design requirement is for the bank to safety carry the design peak discharge! and this represents the bank capacity. For an absorption bank the important design requirement is for the bank lo hold a certain volume of runoff without overtopping, and this represents the bank capacity. See also DESIGN CAPACITY.
BANK SPACING= (sfr) The actual distance along the ground between adjacent soil conservation banks! used particularly when lalking to landholders. See also HORIZONTAL INTERVAL.VERTICAL INTERVAL.
BANKING SYSTEM= (str) A scheme involving the construction of a series of soil conservation banks to control erosion over a large area.Such a system is frequently integrated with a number of gully control structures and/or waterways. In some circumstances a parallel banking system allows for easier cultivation between the banks.
BAR= (csd)An offshore ridge of unconsolidated material submerged by high tide, lying al the mouth of a river or a short distance from and parallel to the beach. Bars tend to form in beach systems following periods of beach erosion and represent a temporary storage of beach sand which is returned during ensuing light weather
BAR= (Ifm) An elongated gently to moderatety inclined low ridge of unconsolidated sediment built up by channelted water flow. Typicatty occurs as part of a streambed as a resutt of tocafised retardance to ftow, causing deposition of sediment.
BARE FALLOWING= (agr) See FALLOWtNG.
BASAL COVER= (ram, agr) The proportion of the ground surface actually covered or occupied by the stem or stems of a ptant at ground tevel, expressed as a percentage. Cf. COVER.
BASE FLOW= (hyd) See TRICKLE FLOW.
BASE PLATE= (sur) A metal plate with a central high point on which the staff is placed at change points, where necessary, during levelling.
BASIN= (hyd) The area drained by a river. The term is also used to describe an area which, when surrounded by embankments, may be flood irrigated.
BATTER= (str) The excavated or constructed face of a dam wail, embankment or cutting! produced as a result of earthmoving operations involving cutting and filling.In describing batter grade. 1:3 or lin 3 means a fall (or rise) of i vertical metre in a horizontal distance of 3 metres.Batters created in the construction of soil conservation banks are identified by numbering them 1, 2 and 3 on the basis that the No. 2 batter is always the waterbearing lace of the embankment and the No, i batter is the excavation batter. Thus, on a conventional bank the No. 1 batter is upslope of the embankment the No. 2 batter is the uphilt side of the embankment (uphitl batter) and the No. 3 batter is the downhill side of the embankment (downhill batter). On a back-push bank the No. i batter is downslope of the embankment but the embankment batters are numbered similarly to those of a conventional bank, i.e. the No. 2 and 3 batters are the uphill and downhill batters respectively. Batters created in the construction ol gully c ntrol structures and dams are also identified by numbering them 1, 2 and 3 on the basis that the water-bearing face is the No. 2 batter, viz: * No. 1 batter the excavation batter typically tormed on the upstream of the ftoor of the storage. In this case it is denoted the upstream excavation batter. No. 2 batter the batter typically formed by the combination of the exposed face on the downstream side of the floor excavation (downstream excavation batter) and the constructed face on the upstream side of the embankment (upstream embankment batter). lt is always the batter which causes the water to pond.No. 3 batter . the batter formed on the downstream side, or outside, of the embankment and denoted the downstream embankment batter.The above descriptors tor GCS and dam batters are particularly applicable to structures with straight or curved embankments. For square or oblong structures the batters associated with the side embankments should be identified as left or right looking downstream. in conjunction with the numbering system (e.g. left hand No. 2 batter). See also CUT BATTER, FILL BATTER, DAM.
BATTER DROP-DOWN= (eng) A constructed and stabitised drain to carry runoff down a batter, typicatty down the tine of greatest stope.
BATTER STABILISATION= (gen) The process of stabilising batters and their environs. This may invotve vegetative and/or structurat measures. Revegetation ol exposed batters may be achieved by using grasses and legumes sown by hand, seed dritts or hydroseeders, with or without special mulches such as hay and bitumen emulsion, or various types of netting. n certain situations revegetation may invotve sodding or sprigging. Stabitisation of unstabte materiats, particutarty batters subject to mass movement, may require the use of trees such as witlows or poptars to provide more deep rooted stabitity. Masonry measures may inctude revetments, gabions and concrete waUs. Special attention is needed in designing drainage systems, inctuding the use of berms, to provide protection ot the batter surface against erosion by concentrated runoff. To assist stabilisation, batter slopes shoutd be constructed to an angte tess than the angle of repose.
BEACH= (Um, csd) A gentle or moderatety stoping shore at the margin of a sea or take, tormed by waves or tides. Generatty covered by loose granutar materials, but can be composed of a wide range of materiats from boutders to sitts. A beach is tateratty extensive retative to its width.
BEACH FACE= (lfm, cad) The section of the beach normalty exposed to the action of wave uprush.
BEACH RIDGE= (FULL) (lfm, cad) A long tow, mear, even-crested rise built up by wave action at a former shoreline, Such ridges are usually modilied by the wind and may occur singly or in a series of parallel ridges,
BEACH SCARP= (Um, cad) A laterally extensive precipitous tace along a beach or dune formed by erosive wave action where sand falls away under the inlluence of wave-assisted mass movement,
BED= (tim) A variously shaped channel floor which normally carries The flowing water within the channel.
BEDLOAD= (gen) The sediment lhat moves by sliding, rolling or bounding on or very near the bed of a channel due to the action of flowing water. lt is moved mainly by traclive and/or gravitalionat forces, but at velocities less than the surrounding flow. Cf. SUSPENDED SEDIMENT.
BEDROCK= (COUNTRY ROCK) (sol) Solid rock underlying the soil profile or other surface materials. lt does not necessarily represent the parent material of the overlying soil.
BELT TRANSECT= (ram, agr) A strip of vegetation along which and in which plants are mapped and/or other quantitative measurements such as cover are recorded. See also LINE TRANSECT, POINT TRANSECT.
BENCH= (eng) Syn. BERM.
BENCH= (mm) A strip of relatively level earth or rock breaking the continuity of a slope.
BENCH= (lfm) A small flat area breaking the continuity of a hillslope.Benches are usually associated with flat-lying strata.
BENCHMARK= (sur) A fixed point of reference used in levelling.
BENCHMARK SITE= (ram) A fenced off area of land used as a reference in the assessment of range/and condition. Benchmark sites are usually selected on the basis of having been relatively unaffected by grazing activities, as a consequence of distance from drinking water or inaccessibility to stock.
BENTONITE= (sol) A clay usually formed by the weathering of volcanic ash, and which is largely composed of montmoriflonite type clay minerals. t has great capacity to absorb water and swell accordingly. For this reason t is used to seal dams and/or earth embankments built of coarse materials or which contain a coarse textured seam causing them to leak.
BERM= (csd) A level area of loose sand between the upper limit of the swash zone and toe of the toredune, formed trom marine deposition.
BERM= (BENCH) (eng) A constructed ledge formed at one or more levels between the top and bottom of a batter. Its purpose is to intercept runoff and reduce slope instability.
BERM= (str) A constructed ledge on the excavation batter of a dam or tank which increases the storage capacity and/or enables the entrapment of debris before water enters the storage. The latter is achieved by inclining the berm outwards. The term is also applied to a structure used in border check irrigation to prevent sideways flow of water.
BERM DRAIN= (eng) See DRAIN.
BIENNIAL PLANT= (agr) A plant whose tile cycle extends for two years. The first year it produces roots, stems and leaves. In the second year it flowers, produces fruits and seeds for future regeneration, then dies. The term is also used loosely to describe short-lived perennial plants which rarely persist more than two years in sown pasture, such as red clover. Cf. ANNUAL PLANT, PERENNIAL PLANT.
BIFURCATION= (gen) Division into two branches. In a soil conservation context, it is used to describe the formation of two gullies from one, due to the inflow of runoff to a gully head from two separate sources.
BIOLOGICAL FERTILITY= (soI) See SOIL FERTILITY.
BIOMASS= (agr) The quantity of living material present at a given time within a given area, such as the weight of vegetative matter removed by clipping a quadrat. Total biomass within an area would include all living material, whether of plant or animal origin.
BITUMEN= (gen) A viscous hydrocarbon mixture commercially obtained from the destructive distillation of primary energy sources such as coal and crude oil. It retains a 'solid' character under normal air temperatures and for application must be heated. For soil conservation purposes bitumen emulsions are used in stabilisation programs.
BITUMEN EMULSION= (gen) A mixture of bitumen, emulsifying agent, stabilising agent and water which has low viscosity and may be applied without heating. Its production does not create any chemical change in the bìturnen, but the physical state is altered so that it is no longer a homogeneous mass but a series of minute particles, each coated with the emulsifying agent to keep them apart and suspended in the water.





























